Genome-wide alternative splicing training v.2.0 (#4178)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/differential-isoform-expression/tutorial.md

>    - Copy the following tabular data, paste it into the textbox and press <kbd>Build</kbd>
>
>      ```

> >      SRR9050437_Health	{{ page.zenodo_link }}/files/SRR9050437F_health.fastq.gz	fastqsanger.gz	1

Author: The files were available in Zenodo, but I forgot to modify the links :(

>
{: .details}

> The choice of **RNA STAR** as mapper is also determined by the sequencing technology; it has been demonstrated adequate for short-read sequencing data, but when using long-read data, such as PacBio or ONT reads, it is recommended to use **GMAP** as alignment tool ({% cite Krianovi2017 %}).

Author: ```suggestion
The choice of **RNA STAR** as mapper is also determined by the sequencing technology; it has been demonstrated adequate for short-read sequencing data, but when using long-read data, such as PacBio or ONT reads, it is recommended to use **Minimap2** as alignment tool.
```

So, let's perform the mapping step.

> <hands-on-title> Generate intermediate file with RNA STAR</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [RNA STAR](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/rgrnastar/rna_star/2.7.10b+galaxy3) %} with the following parameters:
>    - *"Single-end or paired-end reads"*: `Paired-end (as collection)`
>        - {% icon param-collection %} *"RNA-Seq FASTQ/FASTA paired reads"*: `Trimmed samples` (output of **fastp** {% icon tool %})
>    - *"Custom or built-in reference genome"*: `Use reference genome from history and create temporary index`
>        - {% icon param-file %} *"Select a reference genome"*: `GRCh38.p13.genome.fa.gz`
>        - *"Build index with or without known splice junctions annotation"*: `build index with gene-model`
>            - {% icon param-file %} *"Gene model (gff3,gtf) file for splice junctions"*: `gencode.v43.annotation.gtf.gz`
>
{: .hands_on}

> This first **RNA STAR** run generates three collections: logs, alignments in BAM format, and a collection of BED files with informtion about splice junction coordinates. Now we will use  process the collection of BED files with the objective of filtering non-canonical (column 5 > 0), unannotated (column 6 == 0) junction sites and junctions supported by too few reads (column 7 > 2).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This first **RNA STAR** run generates three collections: logs, alignments in BAM format, and a collection of BED files with information about splice junction coordinates. Now we will process the collection of BED files with the objective of filtering non-canonical (column 5 > 0), unannotated (column 6 == 0) junction sites and junctions supported by too few reads (column 7 > 2).
```

>   - {% icon param-collection %} *"Datasets to concatenate"*: `spliced junctions.bed` (output of **RNA STAR** {% icon tool %})
>
> 2. {% tool [Text reformatting](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/bgruening/text_processing/tp_awk_tool/1.1.2) %} with awk with the following parameters:
>   - {% icon param-file %} *"File to process"*: output of **Concatenate datasets** {% icon tool %}
>   - "*AWK Program*": `($5 > 0 && $7 > 2 && $6==0)`
>
>
> 3. {% tool [Cut](Cut1) %} columns from a table with the following parameters:
>   - "*Cut columns*": `c1,c2,c3,c4,c5,c6`
>   - {% icon param-file %} *"From"*: output of **Text reformatting** {% icon tool %}
>
> 4. {% tool [Sort](sort1) %} data in ascending or descending order with the following parameters:
>   - {% icon param-file %} *"Sort Dataset"*: output of **Cut** {% icon tool %}
>   - "*On column*": `Column 1`
>
> 5. {% tool [Unique lines](sort1) %} assuming sorted input file with the following parameters:
>   - {% icon param-file %} *"File to scan for unique values"*: output of **Sort** {% icon tool %}
> 
> 6. Rename the output as `Splicing database`
>
{: .hands_on}

> Finally we will re-run **RNA STAR** in order to integrate the information about the new splicing events in the analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we will re-run **RNA STAR** in order to integrate the information about the new splicing events in the analysis.
```

>
> **StringTie** uses an aggressive strategy for identifying and removing spurious spliced alignments. If a spliced read is aligned with more than 1% mismatches, keeping in mind that Illumina sequencers have an error rate < 0.5%, then **StringTie** requires 25% more reads than usual to support that particular spliced alignment. In addition, if a spliced read spans a very long intron, **StringTie** accepts that alignment only if a larger anchor of 25 bp is present on both sides of the splice site. Here the term *anchor* refers to the portion of the read aligned within the exon beginning at the exon-intron boundary ({% cite Kovaka2019 %}).
>
>
{: .comment}

The main reason underlying the greater accuracy of **StringTie** most likely derives from its optimization criteria. By balancing the coverage of each transcript across each assembly, it incorporates depth of coverage constraints into the assembly algorithm itself ({% cite Pertea2015 %}).

> <details-title>StringTie long RNA-seq assembly</details-title>
>
> To handle the high error rates in the long reads, **StringTie** implements two techniques:
>

> > First, it correct potentially wrong splice sites by checking all the splice sites present in the alignment of a read with a high-error alignment rate. If a splice site is not supported by any low-error alignment reads, then it tries to find a nearby splice site (within 10 bp, by default) that is supported by the most alignments among all nearby splice sites. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> First, it corrects potentially wrong splice sites by checking all the splice sites present in the alignment of a read with a high-error alignment rate. If a splice site is not supported by any low-error alignment reads, then it tries to find a nearby splice site (within 10 bp, by default) that is supported by the most alignments among all nearby splice sites. 
```

>
> Secondly, it implements a pruning algorithm that reduces the size of the splicing graph to a more realistic size by removing the edges in the graph starting from the edge least supported by reads to the most supported edge, until the number of nodes in the splicing graph falls under a given threshold.
>
{: .details}

> Despite in this training we make use of RNA STAR as mapping tool, it is possible to use different splice-aware aligner such as HISAT2. Independently of the tool, each record with a spliced alignment should have the XS tag in the SAM/BAM file, which indicates the genomic strand from which the RNA that produced the read originated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite in this training we make use of **RNA STAR** as mapping tool, it is possible to use different splice-aware aligner such as **HISAT2**. Independently of the tool, each record with a spliced alignment should have the XS tag in the SAM/BAM file, which indicates the genomic strand from which the RNA that produced the read originated.
```

> This step could be divided two substeps: transcriptome assembly and quantification isoform (figure. X). The first step will allow us to obtain a description of the transcriptome, including coordinates of whole transcriipts and exon localization. This information will be used for improving the quantification in the second step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This step could be divided into two substeps: transcriptome assembly and quantification isoform (fig. 10). The first step will allow us to obtain a description of the transcriptome, including coordinates of whole transcripts and exon localization. This information will be used for improving the quantification in the second step.
```

> > ![Figure 10. StringTie workflow](../../images/differential_isoform/stringtie_algorithm.png "StringTie worklow. Yellow area represent the substep corresponding to transcriptome assembly; this substep generates an annotaiton corresponding to the set of non-redundant transcripts observed in any of the RNA-Seq samples. The blue region corresponds to the quantification step, which makes use of the previously generated. Adapted from Perea et al. 2016.")

Author: ```suggestion
![Figure 10. StringTie workflow](../../images/differential_isoform/stringtie_algorithm.png "StringTie worklow. Yellow area represent the substep corresponding to transcriptome assembly; this substep generates an annotaiton corresponding to the set of non-redundant transcripts observed in any of the RNA-Seq samples. The blue region corresponds to the quantification step, which makes use of the previously generated. Adapted from Perea et al. 2016.")
```

> ![Figure 10. StringTie workflow](../../images/differential_isoform/stringtie_pipeline.png "StringTie worklow. Yellow area represent the substep corresponding to transcriptome assembly; this substep generates an annotaiton corresponding to the set of non-redundant transcripts observed in any of the RNA-Seq samples. The blue region corresponds to the quantification step, which makes use of the previously generated. Adapted from Perea et al. 2016.")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Figure 10. StringTie workflow](../../images/differential_isoform/stringtie_pipeline.png "StringTie worklow. The yellow area represents the substep corresponding to transcriptome assembly; this substep generates an annotation corresponding to the set of non-redundant transcripts observed in any of the RNA-Seq samples. The blue region corresponds to the quantification step, which makes use of the previously generated. Adapted from Perea et al. 2016.")
```

>            - {% icon param-file %} *"GTF/GFF3 dataset to guide assembly"*: `GRCh38.p13.chrom5.gtf`
>        - *"Use Reference transcripts only?"*: `No`
>    - In *"Advanced options"*:
>        - "*Minimum junction coverage*": `3`
>
> 2. Rename the generated collection as `Assembled transcripts coordinates`
>
> 3. {% tool [gffread](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/devteam/gffread/gffread/2.2.1.3+galaxy0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Input BED, GFF3 or GTF feature file "*: `Assembled transcripts`
>    - *"Reference Genome"*: `From your history`
>       - {% icon param-file %} *"Genome Reference Fasta"*: `GRCh38.p13.chrom5.fasta.gz`
>       - From *"Select fasta outputs"*: `fasta file with spliced exons for each GFF transcript`
>
> 4. Rename the collection as `Assembled transcripts sequences`
>
> 5. {% tool [StringTie merge](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/stringtie/stringtie_merge/2.2.1+galaxy1) with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-collection %} *"Transcripts"*: `Assembled transcripts` (output of **StringTie**)
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Reference annotation to include in the merging"*: `GRCh38.p13.chrom5.gtf`
>

> > 6. Rename the output as `Reference transcriptome annotation`
> {: .hands_on}

Author: ```suggestion
> 6. Rename the output as `Reference transcriptome annotation`
>
{: .hands_on}
```

>
{: .details}

> Before starting with the analysis of the isoforms, we will extract the transcript sequences from the annotation generated by **Stringtie merge**. This output will be used in the next section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before starting with the analysis of the isoforms, we will extract the transcript sequences from the annotation generated by **StringTie merge**. This output will be used in the next section.
```

>            - {% icon param-collection %} *"Transcript-level expression measurements"*: `Transcripts Health`
>        - *"Quantification data source"*: `StringTie`
>            - *"Average read length"*: `140`
>            - From *"Analysis mode"*:
>              - {% icon param-file %} *"Annotation generated by StringTie merge"*: `StringTie annotation`
>        - {% icon param-file %} *"Genome annotation (GTF)"*: `gencode.v43.annotation.gtf.gz`
>        - {% icon param-file %} *"Transcriptome"*: `StringTie transcriptome`
>        - *"Remove non-conventional chromosomes"*: `Yes`
>
{: .hands_on}

It generates a **switchAnalyzeRlist** object that contains all relevant information about the isoforms involved in isoform swtches, such as each comparison of an isoform between conditions.

## Pre-processing step

> Once the datasets have been imported into a RData file, we can start with the pre-processing step. In order to enhace the reliability of the downstream analysis, it is important to remove the non-informative genes/isoforms (e.g. single isoform genes and non-expressed isoforms).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the datasets have been imported into a RData file, we can start with the pre-processing step. In order to enhance the reliability of the downstream analysis, it is important to remove the non-informative genes/isoforms (e.g. single isoform genes and non-expressed isoforms).
```

> After the pre-processing, **IsoformSwitchAnalyzieR** performs the differential isoform usage analysis by using **DESXSeq**, which despite originally designed for testing differential exon usage, it has demonstrated to perform exceptionally well for differential isoform usage.**DEXSeq** uses generalized linear models to assess the significance of observed differences in isoform usage values between conditions, taking into account the biological variation between replicates ({% cite dexseq %}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the pre-processing, **IsoformSwitchAnalyzieR** performs the differential isoform usage analysis by using **DESXSeq**, which despite originally designed for testing differential exon usage, it has been demonstrated to perform exceptionally well for differential isoform usage.**DEXSeq** uses generalized linear models to assess the significance of observed differences in isoform usage values between conditions, taking into account the biological variation between replicates ({% cite dexseq %}).
```

![Figure 13. RGMB gene isoform expression profile plot](../../images/differential_isoform/isoformSwitchAnalyzer_gene.png "RGMB isoform expression profile plot. The plot integrates isoform structures along with the annotations, gene and isoform expression and isoform usage including the result of the isoform switch test.")

> In that case, we can appreciate that despite differences in overall gene expression is not statistically significant between health and cancerous tissues, there exists slarge differences between isoforms (despite not statistically significant due to reduced sample size): 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In that case, we can appreciate that despite differences in overall gene expression is not statistically significant between healthy and cancerous tissues, there exist large differences between isoforms (despite not statistically significant due to reduced sample size): 
```

>        - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Include tracks in your plot"*
>            - *"Choose style of the track"*: `Gene track / Bed track`
>                - *"Plot title"*: `Genes`

> >                - {% icon param-file %} *"Track file(s) bed or gtf format"*: Select `StringTie annotation`

Author: Do you think this is fine @lldelisle? By using the annotation generated by StringTie, it allows to visualize the new identified isoforms.

Author: Here you can see the differences https://github.com/galaxyproject/training-material/pull/4178/files#diff-99eca97f5c256615d6b5af5677344ceb285456b9323233fcb09df0c27c5ffcad

> <comment-title>Interpretation of splicing events</comment-title>
>
> The events are classified by comparing the splicing patterns with a hypothetical pre-RNA (fig. 16).
>
> ![Figure 16. Classification of splicing patterns](../../images/differential_isoform/isoformSwitcher_splicing_patterns.png "Splicing patterns diversity. The observed splice patterns (left column) of two isoforms compared as indicated by the color of the splice patterns. The corresponding classification of the event (middle column) and the abreviation used (right column).")
>

> > Mutually exclusive exon is a secial case were two isoforms form the same gene contains two mutually exclusive exons and which are not found in any of the other isoforms from that gene.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Mutually exclusive exon is a special case where two isoforms from the same gene contain two mutually exclusive exons which are not found in any of the other isoforms from that gene.
```

> ![Figure 18. Enrichment/depletion in isoform switch with consequences statistical analysis](../../images/differential_isoform/isoformSwitchAnalyzer_splicing_event.png "Comparison of differential splicing events. The fraction (and 95% confidence inter-val) of isoform switches (x-axis) resulting in gain of a specific alternative splice event (indicated by y axis) in the switch from health to cancer. Dashed line indicate no enrichment/depletion. Color indicate if FDR < 0.05 (red) or not (black).")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Figure 18. Enrichment/depletion in isoform switch with consequences statistical analysis](../../images/differential_isoform/isoformSwitchAnalyzer_splicing_event.png "Comparison of differential splicing events. The fraction (and 95% confidence inter-val) of isoform switches (x-axis) resulting in gain of a specific alternative splice event (indicated by y axis) in the switch from health to cancer. The dashed line indicates no enrichment/depletion and the color indicates if FDR < 0.05 (red) or not (black).")
```

<!-- Needs to be updated!! -->

> According with the results (fig. 18), there are not statistically significant differences in specific splicing type events between both experimental conditions. However, this result is affected by the fact that we are using only a fraction of the total data (remember that we subsampled the origital datasets in order to speed up the analysis).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
According to the results (fig. 18), there are no statistically significant differences in specific splicing type events between both experimental conditions. However, this result is affected by the fact that we are using only a fraction of the total data (remember that we subsampled the original datasets in order to speed up the analysis).
```

# Conclusion

Despite the large amount of RNA-seq data and computational methods available, isoform-based expression analysis is rare. Here we present a pipeline (fig. xx) for performing genome-wide alternative splicing analysis. 

> ![Figure xxx. Genome-wide alternative splicing pipeline scheme](../../images/differential_isoform/full_workflow.png "Genome-wide isoform switching pipeline scheme. The current version (v.3) includes 39 steps.")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Figure xxx. Genome-wide alternative splicing pipeline scheme](../../images/differential_isoform/full_workflow.png "Genome-wide isoform switching pipeline scheme. The current version (v.2) includes 42 steps.")
```
